doc(XCP-ng): Adding multipathing guideline (#316)
xcp-ng/xcp-ng-org: docs/storage/multipathing.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Multipathing

How to properly setup storage multipathing with Xen Orchestra and XCP-ng.

## iSCSI

### Requirements
* Two different network cards (It can be the same model)
* Dedicated network interfaces without VLAN tagging on XCP-ng host and storage unit
* All network interfaces to the hosts and storage unit **must be set to "STP portEdge"** on the network equipment.
* Two different switches (not stacked) **without Spaning-Tree**
* Spanning-tree must be disabled on the switches
* Two VLANs **without L3 routing**
* Two IPv4 subnets **without L3 routing**
* Multiple targets per LUN on your storage unit
* iSCSI target ports are operating in portal mode

:::info

> It is recommended to configure the network interfaces of XCP-ng host servers, switch interfaces, and storage array interfaces with Jumbo frames (MTU 9000).

Reviewer: So, I had read the entire note. But it doesn't answer my question. So I'll try to put it in a different way: you wrote `the network interfaces of XCP-ng host servers`, as if they were necessarily all included in a multipath setup. Is that always the case? What about the management interface? The live migration network when there's one? Networks dedicated to VM transfers? Should we be more specific regarding *what* network interfaces of the host must be configured with jumbo frames?

> It is recommended to configure the network interfaces of XCP-ng host servers, switch interfaces, and storage array interfaces with Jumbo frames (MTU 9000).

Author: I'm only talking about iSCSI interfaces, not the others.

This is iSCSI/FC multipathing documentation: all other interfaces are out of scope and will never be mentioned.

> It is recommended to configure the network interfaces of XCP-ng host servers, switch interfaces, and storage array interfaces with Jumbo frames (MTU 9000).

Reviewer 2: I really really really advise against broadly recommending jumbo frames - on hardware from the last ten or even 15 years, on 10gbE interfaces there is no performance gain - and it opens up a huge box of potential issues that users are going to get themselves into. Something more specific like "if your storage vendor recommends jumbo frames, then do xxx" would be much safer

> It is recommended to configure the network interfaces of XCP-ng host servers, switch interfaces, and storage array interfaces with Jumbo frames (MTU 9000).

Reviewer: > I'm only talking about iSCSI interfaces, not the others.
>
> This is iSCSI/FC multipathing documentation: all other interfaces are out of scope and will never be mentioned.

I thought we had an agreement about this on thursday, after one full hour trying to make you consider my request, and now we're back again to "my document is good as is it, I know my stuff and I won't change it". That's not how peer reviewing works. I have a lot of experience in anticipating how users may interpret stuff the wrong way, and we've spent a lot more time arguing than it would have taken you to add the one or two words that would specify which NICs this applies to.

Your document exists in a broader context, a hypervisor which a complex networking setup. What's obvious to you ("all other interfaces are out of scope and will never be mentioned") is not necessarily obvious to users. When you have the opportunity to make this more obvious, always do. Let's not leave any ambiguity.

Jon's comment also raises important questions, and I kind of agree with him, but I won't take a decision about it for now as it probably requires more internal discussion.

  ctrl2-port1-ip([10.42.1.102/24]):::blueNode
  ctrl2-port2-ip([10.42.2.102/24]):::greenNode

  card1pif1<-->card1-pif1-ip
  card1-pif1-ip<-->vlan421
  vlan421<-->ctrl1-port1-ip
  ctrl1-port1-ip<-->ctrl1-port1
  vlan421<-->ctrl2-port1-ip
  ctrl2-port1-ip<-->ctrl2-port1

  card2pif2<-->card2-pif2-ip
  card2-pif2-ip<-->vlan422
  vlan422<-->ctrl1-port2-ip
  ctrl1-port2-ip<-->ctrl1-port2
  vlan422<-->ctrl2-port2-ip
  ctrl2-port2-ip<-->ctrl2-port2

  card1pif2<-->card1-pif2-ip
  card2pif1<-->card2-pif1-ip
  ctrl1 <----> lun1
  ctrl2 <----> lun1

linkStyle 0 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 1 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 2 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 3 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 4 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 5 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;

linkStyle 6 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 7 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 8 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 9 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 10 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 11 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;

linkStyle 12 stroke:#8C8C8C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 13 stroke:#8C8C8C,stroke-width:2px;
```

> ### Operating procedure

Author: No, everything is detailed

> ### Operating procedure

Reviewer: If I'm asking, that may mean that it's not as clear for the reader that it is for the writer.

What I see a is procedure with 3 sections, the last of which pointing at a doc that explains how to create your SR. As a user who would need to do changes with their SR already created, and/or with multipathing already in place, I wouldn't know what to do with this procedure. What am I allowed to change? When must I reboot? Must I destroy my SR and create a new one? Lots of questions come up related to multipath management on an existing setup.

> ### Operating procedure

Author: This document derives from the creation of SR, so it is understood that it is a creation and not a modification.

Commit performed to clarify as requested

> ### Operating procedure

Reviewer: Solved by adding word "new" to make it clear the procedure is for initial setup.

   
   This can be found in the file `/etc/multipath.xenserver/multipath.conf`
2. If your equipment is not present, ask the manufacturer for the multipath configuration for GNU/Linux otherwise move on to the [next step (Prepare the pool)](../../storage/multipathing/#2-prepare-the-pool)
   
   Add it to the file ```/etc/multipath/conf.d/custom.conf```

   :::info
   In this case, the configuration will be kept after updates.
   :::
   
3. If necessary, migrate the VMs active on the XCP-ng host in question to another one
4. Reboot the current XCP-ng host on the affected pool
5. Do the same for all servers in the pool

#### 2. Prepare the pool
Make sure that multipathing is enabled on the pool. To do this, go to the advanced configuration of the pool

If this is not the case:
1. Make sure there are **no VMs running** on an iSCSI and/or HBA SR in the pool
2. Activate "Enable multipathing for all hosts"

#### 3. Configure the SR
Proceed with the iSCSI SR configuration as indicated in the [storage documentation](../../storage/#iscsi).

## Fiber Channel (HBA)
### Requirements
* Check that the Fiber Channel cards model(s) is supported via the HCL

> * Two different Fiber Channel cards (It can be the same model)

Reviewer 2: this isn't necessarily required, quite a lot of customers have a single FC card with 2 or 4 FC ports, which are connected to redundant paths on their storage network

    end
    subgraph ctrl1[Controller 1]
        direction RL
        ctrl1-port1[port1]
        ctrl1-port2[port2]
    end
    lun1@{ shape: lin-cyl, label: "LUN" }

  end

  vlan421[SAN Switch 1]:::blueNode
  vlan422[SAN Switch 2]:::greenNode

  card1port1<---->vlan421
  vlan421<---->ctrl1-port1
  vlan421<---->ctrl2-port1

  card2port1<---->vlan422
  vlan422<---->ctrl1-port2
  vlan422<---->ctrl2-port2

  ctrl1 <----> lun1
  ctrl2 <----> lun1

linkStyle 0 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 1 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 2 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 3 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 4 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 5 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
```
### Operating procedure

#### 1. Prepare XCP-ng hosts
1. On one of the host servers, make sure that the multipath.conf configuration includes your storage equipment.
   
   This can be found in the file `/etc/multipath.xenserver/multipath.conf`
2. If your equipment is not present, ask the manufacturer for the multipath configuration for GNU/Linux otherwise move on to the [next step (Prepare the pool)](../../storage/multipathing/#2-prepare-the-pool-1)
   

>    Add it to the file ```/etc/multipath/conf.d/custom.conf```

Reviewer 2: as mentioned in the previous section, an example would be good here to ensure customers get the syntax correct

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Multipathing

How to properly setup a new SR with multipathing on Xen Orchestra and XCP-ng.

:::warning

> Do not attempt to enable multipathing on a production pool with existing and active iSCSI and/or HBA and/or FC SRs.

Reviewer 3: Why? What happens if we do? What are the risks? Losing data? Damaging hardware? Something else? The reader will follow an order more easily if they understand the reason behind it

Reviewer 2: @thomas-dkmt so the "reason" for this is that enabling or disabling multipath will disconnect, then reconnect all SRs in the pool (even local ones unrelated to multuipath9ng). So this will fail and not work if you have running VMs on the pool. I think a better message here would be stating that all VMs in the pool must be shut down to enable this for the pool, or you can do it per host by enabling multipath on the specific host's advanced tab, and then users only have to shut down or move all VMs off of that specific host.

Author: rewording

Author: ready to be reviewed

:::

## iSCSI

### Requirements
* Two different network interfaces
* Two different switches
* Multiple targets per LUN on your storage unit
* iSCSI target ports are operating in portal mode

:::info
If the storage vendor recommends using Jumbo Frames, you will need to implement them.

> Since each architecture is unique, feel free to check with the storage vendor if it’s possible to stay with an MTU of 1500 (e.g., using storage dedicated PIF at 10Gb/s or 25Gb/s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since each architecture is unique, feel free to check with the storage vendor if it’s possible to stay with the default 1500 MTU (e.g., using storage dedicated PIF at 10Gb/s or 25Gb/s), as this enables a simpler setup, less prone to misconfigurations, and because with modern hardware MTU has less impact than it used to.
```

:::

:::warning

> 1. Make sure you do not use bond-type network interfaces on the host and on the storage unit for iSCSI interfaces.

Reviewer 3: Same as above. We're showing users a whole warning and telling them not to do something, but without elaborating on the why, which seems like a missed opportunity

  ctrl1-port1-ip<-->ctrl1-port1
  vlan421<-->ctrl2-port1-ip
  ctrl2-port1-ip<-->ctrl2-port1

  card2pif2<-->card2-pif2-ip
  card2-pif2-ip<-->vlan422
  vlan422<-->ctrl1-port2-ip
  ctrl1-port2-ip<-->ctrl1-port2
  vlan422<-->ctrl2-port2-ip
  ctrl2-port2-ip<-->ctrl2-port2

  card1pif2<-->card1-pif2-ip
  card2pif1<-->card2-pif1-ip
  ctrl1 <----> lun1
  ctrl2 <----> lun1

linkStyle 0 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 1 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 2 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 3 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 4 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 5 stroke:#4A90E2,stroke-width:2px;

linkStyle 6 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 7 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 8 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 9 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 10 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 11 stroke:#5CB85C,stroke-width:2px;

linkStyle 12 stroke:#8C8C8C,stroke-width:2px;
linkStyle 13 stroke:#8C8C8C,stroke-width:2px;
```

### Operating procedure

#### 1. Prepare XCP-ng hosts
1. On one of the host servers, make sure that the multipath.conf configuration includes your storage equipment.

>    This can be found in the file `/etc/multipath.xenserver/multipath.conf`

Author: Done

> 2. If your equipment is not present, ask the manufacturer for the multipath configuration for GNU/Linux otherwise move on to the [next step (Prepare the pool)](../../storage/multipathing/#2-prepare-the-pool)

Author: @Fohdeesha didn't want us to give examples because they might change and we would be responsible...
I agree with htis position.
When we have official technological partnerships, I suggest we discuss it again.

   Add it to the file ```/etc/multipath/conf.d/custom.conf```

   For example:
   ```
   devices {

     # Configuration for ACME CORP UltraSAN
     # This is an example of syntax; do not use it in production.
     device {
        vendor  "ACME"
        product "UltraSAN"
        path_selector "service-time 0"
        path_grouping_policy group_by_prio
        prio alua
        features "1 queue_if_no_path"
        hardware_handler "1 alua"
        failback immediate
        rr_weight uniform
        rr_min_io 100
        no_path_retry 10
     }
   }
   ```

   :::info
   In this case, the configuration will be kept after updates.
   :::

> 3. If necessary, migrate the VMs active on the XCP-ng host in question to another one

Reviewer 3: If the elements in a numbered list are full sentences, they should end with a full stop:

```suggestion
3. If necessary, migrate the VMs active on the XCP-ng host in question to another one.
```

Author: Done

```
### Operating procedure

#### 1. Prepare XCP-ng hosts
1. On one of the host servers, make sure that the multipath.conf configuration includes your storage equipment.

   This can be found in the file `/etc/multipath.xenserver/multipath.conf`
2. If your equipment is not present, ask the manufacturer for the multipath configuration for GNU/Linux otherwise move on to the [next step (Prepare the pool)](../../storage/multipathing/#2-prepare-the-pool-1)

   Add it to the file ```/etc/multipath/conf.d/custom.conf```

   For example:
   ```
   devices {

     # Configuration for ACME CORP UltraSAN
     # This is an example of syntax; do not use it in production.
     device {
        vendor  "ACME"
        product "UltraSAN"
        path_selector "service-time 0"
        path_grouping_policy group_by_prio
        prio alua
        features "1 queue_if_no_path"
        hardware_handler "1 alua"
        failback immediate
        rr_weight uniform
        rr_min_io 100
        no_path_retry 10
     }
   }
   ```

   :::info
   In this case, the configuration will be kept after updates.
   :::

3. If necessary, migrate the VMs active on the XCP-ng host in question to another one

> 4. Reboot the current XCP-ng host on the affected pool

Author: done

|-+- policy='service-time 0' prio=10 status=enabled
  |- 8:0:2:1  sdf  8:80   active ready running
  |- 8:0:3:1  sdh  8:112  active ready running
```
:::info
In this example, we have four active paths: our multipathing is working correctly.
:::

### iSCSI
#### Verify iSCSI sessions
You can use the command ```iscsiadm -m session``` to check if iSCSI session is active.

```
tcp: [1] 10.42.1.101:3260,1 iqn.2024-02.com.acme:ultrasan.lun01 (non-flash)
tcp: [2] 10.42.1.102:3260,1 iqn.2024-02.com.acme:ultrasan.lun01 (non-flash)
tcp: [3] 10.42.2.101:3260,2 iqn.2024-02.com.acme:ultrasan.lun01 (non-flash)
tcp: [4] 10.42.2.102:3260,2 iqn.2024-02.com.acme:ultrasan.lun01 (non-flash)
```
:::info
In this example, we have four iSCSI sessions with one LUN.
:::

#### iSCSI: Verify Jumbo Frame configuration
To check the Jumbo Frames configuration, connect to a host server and try pinging all IP addresses involved in your iSCSI storage (target and initiator) using this command.

```
ping -M do -s 8972 <REMOTE_IP_ADDRESS>
```
:::warning
If you get an error, usually ```ping: sendmsg: Message too long```, your MTU settings are incorrect, and you need to fix your network configuration.
:::

:::tip

> If your storage vendor allows it, feel free to use 1500 for MTU.

Reviewer 3: Unless we're using a specific notation here for one reason or another, we can separate thousands and hundreds with a comma:

```suggestion
If your storage vendor allows it, feel free to use 1,500 for MTU.
```

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Multipathing

How to properly setup a new SR with multipathing on Xen Orchestra and XCP-ng.

:::warning
Do not attempt to enable multipathing on a production pool with existing and active iSCSI and/or HBA and/or FC SRs.
:::

## iSCSI

### Requirements

> * Four different network interfaces (we recommend using two separate network cards)

Reviewer 2: I would definitely not put four interfaces as a requirement - I can count on two hands how many customers I've seen in four years using this many - the vast majority are using two. Same with multiple network cards, it's nice to have but absolutely not a requirement

Author: In the initial documentation ;  we can create specific KB if needed.

> * Dedicated network interfaces without VLAN tagging on XCP-ng host and storage unit

Reviewer 2: this is also not necessary, we have a ton of users and customers running iSCSI storage over vlans, there's nothing wrong with it at all

> * All network interfaces to the hosts and storage unit **must be set to "STP portEdge"** on the network equipment

Reviewer 2: I strongly think we should avoid making any kind of network related statements like this, this will totally depend on the customer's environment and isn't related to XCP-ng

Author: In the initial documentation ;  we can create specific KB if needed.

> * Two different switches (not stacked) **without Spanning-Tree**

Reviewer 2: same as above, we really shouldn't make statements like this - lots of customers have STP running on their storage switches just fine to protect against loops. Also stacked switches are fine as well, many, myself included, have ran iSCSI networks over stacked switches

Author: In the initial documentation ;  we can create specific KB if needed.

> * Spanning-tree must be disabled on the switches

Reviewer 2: same as above: not necessarily true, and we need to keep scope in these docs to XCP-ng, not general networking

Author: In the initial documentation ;  we can create specific KB if needed.

> * Two VLANs **without L3 routing**

Reviewer 2: storage vlans can be routed, it works, it just takes a little more setup. Again I think we should remove these out of scope reqs

Author: In the initial documentation ;  we can create specific KB if needed.

  |- 8:0:3:1  sdh  8:112  active ready running
```
:::info
In this example, we have four active paths: our multipathing is working correctly.
:::

### iSCSI
#### Verify iSCSI sessions
You can use the command ```iscsiadm -m session``` to check if iSCSI session is active.

```
tcp: [1] 10.42.1.101:3260,1 iqn.2024-02.com.acme:ultrasan.lun01 (non-flash)
tcp: [2] 10.42.1.102:3260,1 iqn.2024-02.com.acme:ultrasan.lun01 (non-flash)
tcp: [3] 10.42.2.101:3260,2 iqn.2024-02.com.acme:ultrasan.lun01 (non-flash)
tcp: [4] 10.42.2.102:3260,2 iqn.2024-02.com.acme:ultrasan.lun01 (non-flash)
```
:::info
In this example, we have four iSCSI sessions with one LUN.
:::

#### iSCSI: Verify Jumbo Frame configuration
To check the Jumbo Frames configuration, connect to a host server and try pinging all IP addresses involved in your iSCSI storage (target and initiator) using this command.

```
ping -M do -s 8972 <REMOTE_IP_ADDRESS>
```
:::warning
If you get an error, usually ```ping: sendmsg: Message too long```, your MTU settings are incorrect, and you need to fix your network configuration.
:::

:::tip
If your storage vendor allows it, feel free to use 1500 for MTU.
:::

## Appendix

> ### Network configuration exemples for jumbo frames

Reviewer 2: I strongly recommend against including this section -I admire the intention but it's vastly out of scope of XCP-ng (which this documentation is focused on) and can cause headaches down the line - when EOS, IOS, JunOS etc changes syntax in future updates or changes behavior, this becomes tech debt for us to go back and fix. It's also very limited in applicability as in many setups customers will also need to make MTU changes on the parent VLAN, or globally on the switch depending on the switch architecture. Overall we should keep the doc focused to the XCP-ng configuration :)

Author: Section deleted: out of scope

:::warning
Do not attempt to enable multipathing on a production pool with existing and active iSCSI and/or HBA and/or FC SRs.

> You can activate it on the "fly", per XCP-ng host (Advanced tab), but but it is recommended to do so with XCP-ng hosts that have no VMs running.

Reviewer: There's two times "but"

:::

:::warning

> 1. We recommend that you do not use bonded network interfaces on the XCP-ng and on the storage unit for iSCSI interfaces.

Reviewer: "the XCP-ng" there's a word missing here

2. Make sure you do not configure network routes on iSCSI interfaces.
:::

<!-- To be discussed later but to be kept so as not to lose the work

> #### Advanced requirements for high performance - OPTIONAL and not mandatory

Reviewer 2: None of the below settings would directly effect performance unless misconfigured previously, things like vlans, stp, and l3 routing will not change perf unless something is very misconfigured, I maintain that we should not include any of the below commented out section

Author: I remove it

### Operating procedure

#### 1. Prepare XCP-ng hosts

> 1. On one of the XCP-ng host, make sure that the `multipath.conf` configuration includes your storage equipment.

Reviewer: Missing s for `hosts`

1. On one of the XCP-ng host, make sure that the `multipath.conf` configuration includes your storage equipment.

   This can be found in the file `/etc/multipath.xenserver/multipath.conf`

   :::warning

>    Never change the file  `/etc/multipath.xenserver/multipath.conf`.

Reviewer: * I think it's better english to put word "file" at the end. 
* I'd use verb "modify"
* I like to explain why something is forbidden

Suggestion: ""Do not modify `/etc/multipath.xenserver/multipath.conf` directly, as any changes may be overwritten by future system updates." 

Also applies to the other section.

   In this case, the configuration will be kept after updates.
   :::

3. If necessary, migrate the VMs active on the XCP-ng host in question to another one.
4. Reboot the XCP-ng host.
5. Do the same for all XCP-ng hosts in the pool.

#### 2. Prepare the pool
Make sure that multipathing is enabled on the pool. To do this, go to the advanced configuration of the pool.

If this is not the case:
1. Make sure there are **no VMs running** on an iSCSI and/or HBA SR in the pool.

> 2. Activate "Enable multipathing for all XCP-ng hosts".

Reviewer: Likely a search and replace mistake.

3. If necessary, migrate the VMs active on the XCP-ng host in question to another one.
4. Reboot the XCP-ng host.

> 5. Do the same for all XCP-ng hosts in the pool (step 1. to 4.).

Reviewer: Step 1 is not necessary, as the file is identical on every host. Also applies to the other section.

### Operating procedure

#### 1. Prepare XCP-ng hosts

> 1. On one of the XCP-ng host, make sure that the multipath.conf configuration includes your storage equipment.

Reviewer: Plural for `hosts`

   In this case, the configuration will be kept after updates.
   :::

3. If necessary, migrate the VMs active on the XCP-ng host in question to another one.
4. Reboot the XCP-ng host.
5. Do the same for all XCP-ng hosts in the pool.

#### 2. Prepare the pool
Make sure that multipathing is enabled on the pool. To do this, go to the advanced configuration of the pool.

If this is not the case:
1. Make sure there are **no VMs running** on an iSCSI and/or HBA SR in the pool.

> 2. Activate "Enable multipathing for all XCP-ng hosts".

Reviewer: Same search and replace mistake.
